# OpenRouteIndex

OpenRouteIndex is a tool to generate an overview of recreational routes in the Netherlands that exist in the
OpenStreetMap database. The tool aims to help OSM mappers find routes that need surveying, spot issues with tagging,
and test for common errors in routes (that may be a result of other changes in OSM).

The pages are rendered fully in the Dutch language, currently without any support for translations.

OpenRouteIndex does not aim to replace or compete with Waymarked Trails and/or knooppuntnet.nl. It also does not want to
be or become a more generic route website such as Wandelnet or Komoot.

## Technical overview

 - An updater script fetches the latest export for the Netherlands from Geofabrik.
 - The export is stripped from features that are not relevant for the index to keep the dataset small.
 - The dataset is then imported into PostgreSQL using osm2pgsql.
 - Additional metadata is generated using a SQL file, transforming the existing data.
 - Validator scripts are run to check for errors in routes.
 - The data is then presented into a set of HTML pages using Jinja2 templates.


## Running locally

You need the following tools to be (globally) installed:

 - Python 3
 - uv (a package manager for Python)
 - PostgreSQL server with PostGIS extensions
 - PostgreSQL client `psql`
 - osm2pgsql


Run `uv sync` to retrieve the Python dependencies.
Ensure you have a PostgreSQL database with the PostGIS extension installed (`CREATE EXTENSION postgis;`), 
the default database name is `openrouteindex_0`. You can change the database settings using the `$DATABASE_URL` 
environment variable.

To perform a full update cycle, run `uv run ori-updater`. This fetches the latest export, updates the database, 
validates the routes and generates the HTML output. When `$FTP_URL` is set, the output is uploaded to the FTP server 
as well. Warning: all other files in the remote FTP directory will be deleted when using this option!

Other commands are available for convenience during development:

- `uv run ori-generator` to generate the HTML output into '${OUTPUT_DIR:./out}'
- `uv run ori-devserver` to run a Werkzeug development server for viewing the HTML pages on-demand (no need for `ori-generator`)
- `uv run ori-validator` to update the validation status of all routes in the database


## Limitations

OpenRouteIndex is not a fully-featured static site generator and (for example) cannot deal with folders properly.
It also makes quite a lot of assumptions about your local environment, and the code is not (very well) documented,
since this originated as a personal tool meant for very occasional use.

## AI Policy

Even though I have used AI myself on occasion to help write some SQL queries and the route validation routine, please 
do not submit issues or pull requests on this repository that were fully generated by AI.


## License

OpenRouteIndex is licensed under the GNU Affero General Public License 3.0 only. A copy of the license text can be found 
in the `LICENSE` file, or at <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.en.html>.

Some data in this repository is copied from other projects, and is not covered under the OpenRouteIndex licensing. 
Please see the Attribution section below for details on the per-project licensing terms.


## Attribution

OpenRouteIndex uses OpenStreetMap data, which is retrieved from Geofabrik and OpenPlanetData.com. The data itself is not 
included in this repository, but will be fetched automatically from the internet when using `ori-updater`. This means 
the output of OpenRouteIndex does contain OpenStreetMap data and thus is subject to the relevant terms.

OpenRouteIndex includes fonts from [FontAwesome](https://github.com/FortAwesome/Font-Awesome) Free. The icons are 
licensed as CC-BY-4.0, and the webfont is licensed as SIL OFL 1.1.

OpenRouteIndex includes the [Bootstrap](https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap) CSS framework and its JavaScript. 
Bootstrap is released under the MIT license.

OpenRouteIndex includes the [Bootswatch](https://github.com/thomaspark/bootswatch/) Flatly theme, which itself is a 
based on Bootstrap CSS. Bootswatch is released under the MIT license.

OpenRouteIndex includes the [MapLibre GL JS](https://github.com/maplibre/maplibre-gl-js) map viewer, which is released 
under the 3-Clause BSD license, and in turn contains code from glfx.js, released under the MIT license.